---
title: On Guard - Why Does Anything At All Exist
description: Exerpts from On Guard chapter 3
pubDate: 2024-03-05T22:00:00.000Z
heroImage: ../../assets/images/ylona-maria-rybka-Muy1MbTELcA-unsplash.jpg
category: On Guard
tags:
  - WilliamLaneCraig
  - OnGuard
  - CommonplaceBook
---

**Leibniz's Argument**
1. Everything that exists has an explanation of its existence
2. If the universe has an explanation of its existence, that explanation is God.
3. The universe exists.
What logically follows:
4. The universe has an explanation of its existence.
5. Therefore, the explanation of the universe's existence is God. 

**Premise 1 Objection: God must have an explanation of His existence**
- Objection is based off a misunderstanding of what Leibniz meant by an "explanation." In his view there are two kinds of things:
    - a. Things that exist necessarily 
        - These are things that exists by a necessity of their own nature. Its impossible for them not to exist. Mathematicians think that numbers and other mathematical entities exist in this way. 
    - b. things that are produced by some external cause
        - i.e. people, planets, and galaxies
- Therefore, premise 1 could be more fully stated this way: Everything that exists has an explanation of its existence, either in the necessity of its own nature or in an external cause. 
**Taxicab Fallacy**: Some atheists will say that premise 1 is true of everything in the universe, but is not true of the universe itself. Everything in the universe has an explanation, but the universe itself has no explanation. 
- Fallacy: You can't say everything has an explanation of its existence and then suddenly exempt the universe. 
**Another fallacy: It is impossible for the universe to have an explanation.**
- Some atheists have tried to justify making the universe an exception to premise 1 by saying the explanation of the universe would have to be some prior state of affairs in which the universe didn't yet exist. But that would be nothingness, and nothingness can't be the explanation of anything. So the universe must just exist inexplicably. 
- Fallacy: it assumes that the universe is all there is, so that if there were no universe there would be nothing. The objection assumes that atheism is true. This is begging the question. 
    - Begging the question fallacy occurs when an argument's premises assume the truth of the conclusion, instead of supporting it. 

**Premise 2 - Another Argument for:**
- Think of what the universe is: all space-time reality, including all matter and energy. It follows that if the universe has a cause of its existence, that case must be a nonphysical, immaterial being beyond space and time. 
    - Only two sorts of things could fit that description: an abstract object like a number or an unembodied mind. 
        - But abstract objects (like numbers) don't cause anything.
        - So the cause of the existence of the universe must be a transcendent Mind. 

Atheist Alternative: The Universe Exists Necessarily
- Some might say, what about the matter that everything is made of? Maybe the matter exists necessarily, and all these things are just different configurations of matter.
    - Problem: according to the standard model of subatomic physics, matter itself is composed of tiny fundamental particles that cannot be further broken down. The universe is just a collection of all these particles arranged in different ways. 
    - Question: Couldn't a different collection of fundamental particles have existed instead of this one? Does each and every one of these particles exist necessarily? 
        - This is certainly possible, but if it were the case, then a different universe would have existed. A universe made up of different particles, even if they were identically arranged as in this universe, would be a different universe. It follows, then, that the universe does no exist by a necessity of its own nature. 
