---
title: On Guard - Why is the Universe Fine-Tuned For Life
description: Exerpts from On Guard chapter 5
pubDate: 2024-03-05T22:00:00.000Z
heroImage: ../../assets/images/bg.jpg
category: On Guard
tags:
  - WilliamLaneCraig
  - OnGuard
  - CommonplaceBook
---

**The Rebirth of Design**
- We’ve come to discover that the universe is fine-tuned for the existence of intelligent life with a complexity and delicacy that literally defy human comprehension.

**Two Kinds of Fine-Tuning**
- There are two kinds of fine-tuning: constants of nature and certain arbitrary physical quantities
- *Natures Constants:*
    - When the laws of nature are expressed as mathematical equations, you find appearing in them certain symbols that stand for unchanging quantities, like the force of gravity, the electromagnetic force, and the subatomic “weak” force.
    - The laws of nature do not determine the value of these constants.
- *Arbitrary Quantities:*
    - Certain arbitrary quantities are just put in as initial conditions on which the laws of nature operate.
    - Because these quantities are arbitrary, they’re also not determined by the laws of nature.
    - An example would be the amount of thermodynamic disorder (or entropy) in the early universe. It’s just given in the big bang as an initial condition, and the laws of nature then take over and determine how the universe will develop from there. 

**Definition of “Fine-Tuning”**
- Scientists have been surprised to discover is that these constants and quantities must fall into an extraordinarily narrow range of values for the universe to be life-permitting. This is what is meant by the fine-tuning of the universe for life.

**Examples of Fine-Tuning**
- Weak force, one of the four fundamental forces of nature, which operates inside the nucleus of an atom, is so finely tuned that an alteration in its value by even one part out of 10^100 would have prevented a life-permitting universe.
-  A change in the value of the so-called cosmological constant, which drives the acceleration of the universe’s expansion, by as little as one part in 10^120 would have rendered the universe life-prohibiting.
- Roger Penrose of Oxford University has calculated that the odds of that low-entropy state’s existing by chance alone is on the order of one chance out of 10^10^(123)
- Having an accuracy of even one part out of 10^60 is like firing a bullet toward the other side of the observable universe, twenty billion light-years away, and nailing a one-inch target.

**Possible Objection and its Answer**
- Objection: But if the constants and quantities had had different values, then maybe different forms of life might have evolved
- Answer: When scientists say a universe is life-permitting, they’re not talking about just present forms of life. By “life” scientists just mean the property of organisms to take in food, extract energy from it, grow, adapt to their environment, and reproduce. In order for life, so defined, to exist, the constants and quantities of the universe have to be unbelievably fine-tuned. In the absence of fine-tuning, not even matter, not even chemistry would exist, much less planets where life might evolve.

**Another Objection and its Answer**
- Objection: But maybe in a universe governed by different laws of nature, such disastrous consequences might not result.
- Answer: We’re not concerned with universes governed by different laws of nature. We have no idea what such universes might be like! Rather we’re concerned solely with universes governed by the same laws of nature but with different values of the constants and arbitrary quantities. Because the laws are the same, we can determine what would happen if the constants and quantities were to be altered. And the results turn out to be disastrous. Among universes governed by our laws of nature, there’s almost no chance that a randomly chosen universe would be life-permitting.

**An Argument for Design**
1. The fine-tuning of the universe is due to either physical necessity, chance, or design.
2. It is not due to physical necessity or chance.
3. Therefore, it is due to design.

Premise 2
