**Al-Ghazali's Argument (Kalam)**
1. Whatever begins to exist has a cause.
2. The universe began to exist.
3. Therefore, the universe has a cause. 

**Premise 1**
1. Something cannot come from nothing.
    - If you deny premise 1, you've got to think that the whole universe just appeared at some point in the past for no reason whatsoever. 
    - Sometimes skeptics will respond to this point by saying that in physics subatomic particles (so-called "virtual particles") come into being from nothing. This skeptical response represents a deliberate abuse of science. The vacuum in modern physics is not what the layman understands by "vacuum," namely, nothing. Rather in physics the vacuum is a seas of fluctuating energy governed by physical laws and having a physical structure. To tell laymen that on such theories something comes from nothing is a distortion of those theories. 
    - Properly understood, "nothing" does not mean just empty space. Nothing is the absence of anything whatsoever, even space itself. 
2. If something can come into being from nothing, then it becomes inexplicable why just anything or everything doesn't come into being from nothing.
    - **Objection**: if everything has a cause, what is God's cause?
        - Premise 1 does not say that everything has a cause. Rather it says that everything *that begins to exist* has a cause. Something that is eternal wouldn't need a cause, since it never came into being. God is eternal and uncaused. 
3. Common experience and scientific evidence confirm the truth of premise 1. 

**Premise 2**
1. **First philosophical argument**: an actually infinite number of things cannot exist.
    - Ghazali argued that if the universe never began to exist, then there have been an infinite number of past events prior to today. But, he argued, an infinite number of things cannot exist. Ghazali recognized that a *potentially* infinite number of things could exist, but he denied that an *actually* infinite number of things could exists. 
    - Potential vs actual infinity:
        - Potentially infinite serves merely as an ideal limit that is never reached. I.e., the number of divisions (mathematical) is potentially infinite, in the sense that you could go on dividing endlessly. But you'd never arrive at an "infinitieth" division. You'd never have an actually infinite number of parts or divisions. 
        - Ghazali argued that if an actually infinite number of things could exist, then various absurdities would result. 
- *Objection from Modern Math:*
    - in modern set theory the use of actually infinite sets is commonplace.
    - Answer to objection: These developments in modern mathematics merely show that if you adopt certain axioms and rules, then you can talk about actually infinite collections in a consistent way, without contradicting yourself. But it does absolutely nothing to show that such mathematical entities really exist or that an actually infinite number of things can really exist. 
        - An example: Hilbert's hotel: infinite guests, infinitely full, infinitely able to accept new guests. Can talk about it, but in reality would be absurdity. 
2. **Second philosophical argument**: you can't pass through an infinite number of elements one at a time
    - The series of past events has been formed by adding one event after another. No series that is formed by adding one member after another can be actually infinite. For you cannot pass through an infinite number of elements one at a time.
- **Objection**: From Every Past Point, We Can Reach the Present
    - Some critics have responded to this argument by pointing out that even in a beginningless past, every event in the past is only a finite distance from the present.
- **Answer to Objection**: The Fallacy of Composition
    - This objection commits a logical fallacy called the “fallacy of composition.” This is the fallacy of confusing a property of *a part* with a property of *the whole*. 
    - Just because every finite part of a series can be crossed or counted down doesn’t mean the whole infinite series can be crossed or counted.
3. **First Scientific Argument**: The Expansion of the Universe
    - The Big Bang
    - The Beginning of Time
        - As you trace the expansion of the universe back in time, everything gets closer and closer together. According to the Friedman-Lemaître model, that’s what happens to space as you go back in time. Eventually the distance between any two points in space becomes zero. Space and time can’t be extended any further back than that. It’s literally the beginning of space and time.
4. **Second Scientific Argument**: The Thermodynamics of the Universe
    - The second law of thermodynamics: unless energy is being fed into a system, that system will become increasingly disorderly.
    - Already in the nineteenth century scientists realized that the second law implied a grim prediction for the future of the universe. Given enough time, all the energy in the universe will spread itself out evenly throughout the universe, just as the gas spreads itself out evenly throughout the bottle. The universe will become a featureless soup in which no life is possible. 

**The Kalam Cosmological Argument Outline**

1. Whatever begins to exist has a case
    1. Something cannot come from nothing
        1. Objection: Physics gives examples of things coming from nothing.
            1. Response: The vacuum is not nothing
    2. Otherwise, anything and everything could come from nothing.
    3. Experience confirms this truth. 
2. The universe began to exist
    1. An actually infinite number of past events cannot exist
        1. Objection: Math proves that it can
            1. Response: Math establishes only a universe of discourse
        2. Objection: We don't understand infinity
            1. Response: Infinity is mathematically well understood
        3. Objection: Your absurd situations are what we should expect if an actual infinite exists.
            1. Response: This reply doesn't resolve the absurdities. 
    2. A series formed successively cannot be actually infinite.
        1. Objection: From any past point we can reach the present
            1. Response: This replay commits the fallacy of composition.
        2. If it could, absurdities would result.
            1. Increasing disparities would vanish.
            2. One would have finished already
    3. Expansion of the universe
        1. Objection: Nonstandard models of the origin of the universe exist.
            1. Response: Viable nonstandard models also predict a beginning.
    4. Thermodynamics of the universe
        1. Objection: Models aimed at avoiding a beginning exist
            1. Response: These models fail to avoid a beginning
3. Therefore, the universe has a cause.
    1. This follows from 1 and 2.
        1. Objection: The universe caused itself
            1. Response: Then the universe would have to exist before it came to exist.
    2. This cause is an uncaused, timeless, spaceless, immaterial, powerful Personal Creator. 